Research Topic: Afaan Oromoo Glossary for Nationally Harmonized Curriculum of BA in Afaan Oromoo

1. Introduction


Afaan Oromoo is one of a widely spoken indigenous language in Africa (Mekuria, 1997: 326). This indigenous language is a lingua franca in many parts of 
Ethiopia, southern half of Ethiopia in particular. Although it is an important language of wider communication in Ethiopia, Afaan Oromoo has’t been given 
a chance to develop until very recently (Mekuria, 1997: 326). Since the fall of the Derg regime in 1991, prohibition on the use of Afaan Oromoo has been 
legally removed. Afaan Oromoo has got its official recognition altogether with other languages of Ethiopian nations and nationalities.  Consequently, 
Afaan Oromoo has become a fast growing language in Ethiopia. It has become the official working language of Oromiya Regional State. Afaan Oromoo has been 
promoted to language of mass media and medium of instruction from grade 1-8. Afaan Oromoo is taught as a subject in high schools. This indigenous language 
is a medium of instruction and given as a field of study in Teacher’s Training Colleges in Oromiya Regional State (Disasa, 2013: 3080). Teaching Afaan 
Oromoo in Ethiopian Higher Education has started. Currently, Afaan Oromoo is offered as a field of study for BA, MA and PhD level at different 
universities of Ethiopia. Afaan Oromoo is studied as academic discipline in many Ethiopian government universities; namely Addis Ababa University, 
Jimma University, Haromaya University, Adama Universitiy, Wallaga University, Dilla University, Mettu University, etc (Disasa, 2013: 3080). 




2. Rationale

MoE has recently prepared a four year program of nationally harmonized higher education curriculum for bachelor of arts degree in Afaan Oromoo, 
Literature and Communication as a substitution of the three year BA program of harmonized curriculum to be offered in different universities offering 
the program in Afaan Oromoo. The nationally revised and harmonized curriculum is geared to produce competent Afaan Oromoo graduates that can meet 
current market needs of the people, the Oromo people in particular.  Because of this case students stay for a period of four years in the universities. 
Moreover, many new courses are added and old courses are upgraded; many new terminologies are introduced in the fields of language skill, mass media, 
literature, folklore and translation. 

But, these new terminologies are not translated into Afaan Oromoo. Terminologies are technical terms of fields of studies or courses. These technical 
terms are key words to understand the subject matter. These key words need be standardized and prepared in the form of glossary to be used as a 
reference material across all universities affiliated with Afaan Oromoo. But, currently, all terminologies in different fields are not standardized;  
and there is no guiding glossary to be used similarly in different universities of Ethiopia for teaching BA in Afaan Oromoo. In spite of the fact that 
different universities teach students different courses on the basis of the nationally harmonized higher education curriculum for BA in Afaan Oromoo, 
they haven’t developed common standard glossary to teach the corresponding different courses. Consequently, different universities teach the same course 
using different terminologies. More worse, different instructors who teach the same course in the same university do not have a standard terminology. 

The absence of a standard nationally harmonized terminology for a nationally harmonized higher education curriculum for bachelor of arts degree in 
Afaan Oromoo hinders the production of well-quliffied Afaan Oromoo professionals who can contribute to the development of the country, eduction sector 
in particular. This thematic research fills this gap by preparing a nationally standardized terminologies for a nationally harmonized higher education 
curriculum for BA in Afaan Oromoo. In other words, these thematic research prepares standard terminology by collecting different terminologies from 
different universities. The research project is original in the sense that it fills gap of standard terminology for a nationally harmonized curriculum 
of BA in Afaan Oromoo the outcome of which is achievable and measurable; and these thematic research is undertaken by professionals who have experience 
in teaching BA in Afaan Oromoo in Addis Ababa university for a long period of time.  

The research methodology of the thematic research is mixed; it uses both qualitative and quantitative approaches. Data is collected from all universities 
of Ethiopia affiliated with a nationally harmonized higher education curriculum for BA in Afaan Oromoo. Different data collection tools such as on 
line questionnaires, discussion groups, seminars, glossary preparation workshops and validation workshops shall be employed. 

3. Research Aims and Questions

1.	To standardize language skill terminologies of BA in Afaan Oromoo
2.	To standardize mass media terminologies of BA in Afaan Oromoo
3.	To standardize linguistic terminologies of BA in Afaan Oromoo
4.	To standardize literature terminologies of BA in Afaan Oromoo
5.	To standardize folklore terminologies of BA in Afaan Oromoo
6.	To prepare reference glossary of BA terminologies in Afaan Oromoo
